In this video we'll do a quick overview of looping in general and specifically in C++.
Looping is also called iteration or repetition.
It's the third basic building block of programming.
After this section of the course you have all you need to begin to solve very complex problems using
sequence selection and iteration in this course we're covering C++.
However all programming languages must support sequence selection and iteration.
Once you understand these concepts completely then it's just a matter of picking up the syntax of another
programming language and you'll be able to implement solutions to problems in those languages as well.
Loops allow the execution of a statement or block of statements repeatedly and they're made up of two
sections.
First the loop condition which determines when we iterate.
And when we don't.
Second is the loop body.
That's the statement or block of statements that will be repeated.
That's it.
Conceptually it's very simple.
Let's look at a few use cases for looping.
Here's some typical use cases for looping.
We want to execute a loop or repeat statements a specific number of times.
For example we want to do something 10 times where we ask the user how many times they wish to do something.
Another use case is iterating one time for each element in a collection.
So suppose we have items in an array or vector and we want to process each of those items.
Other times we want to loop until a specific condition becomes true.
So we loop until we see a specific value.
Then we stop of course we can also loop forever.
This isn't as common as the other use cases but operating systems are an example of programs that loop
forever executing system processes.
There are many other use cases and variations of these existing use cases.
Let's look at the C++ looping constructs.
Now C++ has three main looping structures.
The for loop.
The while loop and the do while loop.
The for loop has arranged base variant which is really great.
First let's talk about the for loop.
The for loop is typically used when you want to iterate a specific number of times.
For example you want to loop 10 times or end times where end is determined by the program.
The range based for loop makes it really easy to iterate through a range of items or through the elements
of a collection with arrays vectors and other collections.
This is a great loop to use the while loop iterates while a specific condition remains true when the
condition becomes false.
We terminate the loop in the case of the While loop.
The condition is checked at the beginning of every iteration.
The do while loop is similar to the While loop.
Except that the condition is checked after each iteration with only these basic loops we can implement
any iteration pattern we want.
All programming languages have loop constructs.
The C++ loops are clear and concise.
Let's go through the C++ loops one at a time.
Let's start with the for loop and the next video.